\chapter{Environment}
\label{chap-environment}

\section{Introduction}

Compiling a \commonlisp{} program is done in constant interaction with
an \emph{environment}.  The \hs{} stipulates%
\footnote{See Section 3.2.1 of the \hs{}.}
that there are four different environments that are relevant to
compilation:

\begin{itemize}
\item The \emph{startup environment}.  This environment is the global
  environment of the \commonlisp{} system when the compiler was
  invoked.
\item The \emph{compilation environment}.  This environment is the
  local environment in which forms are compiled.  It is also the
  environment that is passed to macro expanders.
\item The \emph{evaluation environment}.  According to the \hs{}, this
  environment is ``a run-time environment in which macro expanders and
  code specified by \texttt{eval-when} to be evaluated are
  evaluated''. 
\item The \emph{run-time environment}.  This environment is used when
  the resulting compiled program is executed.
\end{itemize}

The \hs{} does not specify how environments are represented, and there
is no specified protocol for manipulating environments.  As a result,
each implementation has its own representation and its own protocols. 

In this chapter, we define a protocol for accessing the compilation
environment during compilation.  When \sysname{} is asked to convert a
form to an abstract syntax tree, client code must supply an object
that represents the startup environment.  During the conversion
process, \sysname{} will call the functions documented in
\refSec{sec-environment-augmenting} to augment the startup environment
with information introduced by binding forms to form an augmented
compilation environment.  To determine the meaning of the program
elements in the form to be converted, \sysname{} will call the
functions documented in \refSec{sec-environment-querying}.  

Client code must supply methods on the functions in
\refSec{sec-environment-augmenting} to augment the environment and
return the resulting environment.  Client code must also supply
methods on the functions in \refSec{sec-environment-querying} that
will query the environment (whether the startup environment or the
augmented environment) and return the relevant information to
\sysname{}. 

It might seem that \sysname{} could represent the \emph{local part} of
the environment (i.e., the part of the environment that is temporarily
introduced when nested forms are compiled) in whatever way it pleases,
but this is not the case.  The reason is that the full environment
must be passed as an argument to macro expanders that are defined in
the startup environment, and those macro expanders are implementation
specific.  It is also not possible for \sysname{} to define its own
version of \texttt{macroexpand}, because a globally defined
implementation-specific macro expander may call the
implementation-specific version of \texttt{macroexpand} which would
fail if given an environment other than the one defined by the
implementation. 

\sysname{} does, however, provide some features that are useful for an
incomplete implementation for which no representation of the local
part of the environment has been determined.  The creator of such an
implementation may choose to use the \emph{default representation} of
that local part of the environment supplied by \sysname{}.  The
default version can also be used for a more complete implementations,
provided that the implementation-specific version of
\texttt{macroexpand} is not called on an environment using this
default representation.

\section{Package}
\label{sec-environment-package}

All symbols documented in this chapter have as their home package the
package named \texttt{cleavir-environment}.  This package has a single
nickname which is \texttt{cleavir-env}.  We strongly advise against
\texttt{:use}-ing this package, because it contains several symbols
that have the same name as symbols in the package named
\texttt{common-lisp}.  Instead, we advise that client code use symbols
in this package with their explicit package prefix.

\section{Querying the environment}
\label{sec-environment-querying}

In this section, we describe classes and functions that are used by
the compiler to query the environment concerning information about
program elements that the compiler needs in order to determine how to
process those program elements. 

When the compiler calls a generic query function, it passes the
environment as the first argument.  Client code must supply methods
on these functions, specialized to its particular representation of
environments. 

These methods should return instances of the classes described in this
section.  Any such instance contains all available information about
some program element in that particular environment.  This information
must typically be assembled from different parts of the environment.
For that reason, client code typically creates a new instance whenever
a query function is called, rather than attempting to store such
instances in the environment.  If any of these client-supplied methods
fails to accomplish its task, it should return \texttt{nil}.

Client code is free to define subclasses of the classes described
here, for instance in order to represent implementation-specific
information about the program elements.  Client code would then
typically also provide auxiliary methods or overriding primary methods
on the compilation functions that handle these classes.

\subsection{Variable information}

\Defgeneric {variable-info} {environment symbol}

This function is called by the compiler whenever a symbol in a
\emph{variable} position is to be compiled.  It returns an instance of
one of the classes described below.

\Defcondition {no-variable-info}

This condition is signaled by \sysname{} when a client-supplied method
on the generic function \texttt{variable-info} returns \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod {name} {(condition {\tt no-variable-info})}

This method returns the name of the variable for which no info was
available. 

\subsubsection{Lexical variable information}

\Defclass {lexical-variable-info}

This class represents information about lexical variables.  An
instance of this class is returned by a call to \texttt{variable-info}
when it turns out that the symbol passed as an argument refers to a
lexical variable.

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the lexical variable.  This initarg
must be supplied. 

\Definitarg {:identity}

This initarg is used to supply some kind of implementation-defined 
\emph{identity}.  The implementation can supply any object as the
identity, because it is not interpreted by the compiler.  However, the
\emph{same} identity must be supplied each time for a particular
lexical variable.  This initarg must be supplied. 

\Definitarg {:type}

This initarg is used to supply the \emph{type} of the lexical
variable.  The type can be any type specifier and it may contain
user-defined types.  If this initarg is omitted, it defaults to
\texttt{t}. 

\Definitarg {:ignore}

This initarg is used to supply \emph{ignore} information about the
lexical variable.  The value of this initarg can be either
\texttt{ignore} (i.e., the symbol with that name in the
\texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the variable is declared
\texttt{ignore}, \texttt{ignorable} (i.e., the symbol with that name
in the \texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the variable is
declared \texttt{ignorable}, or \texttt{nil} meaning that no ignore or
ignorable declaration for this variable is in scope.  If this initarg
is not supplied, it defaults to \texttt{nil}.

\Definitarg {:dynamic-extent}

This initarg is used to supply \emph{dynamic extent} information about
the lexical variable.  The value of this initarg can be either
\texttt{t}, meaning that the variable has been declared
\texttt{dynamic-extent}, or \texttt{nil}, meaning that the variable
has not been declared \texttt{dynamic-extent}.  The default value when
this initarg is not supplied is \texttt{nil}. 

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt lexical-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{lexical-variable-info}, this
method returns the name of the lexical variable as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {identity} {(info {\tt lexical-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{lexical-variable-info}, this
method returns the identity of the lexical variable as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:identity}.

\Defmethod {type} {(info {\tt lexical-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{lexical-variable-info}, this
method returns the \emph{type} of the variable as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:type}.  If that initarg was not supplied, this method
returns \texttt{t}.

\Defmethod {ignore} {(info {\tt lexical-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{lexical-variable-info}, this
method returns the \emph{ignore} information of the lexical variable as
supplied by the initarg \texttt{:ignore}.  If that initarg was not
supplied, this method returns \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod {dynamic-extent} {(info {\tt lexical-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{lexical-variable-info}, this
method returns the \emph{dynamic extent} information of the lexical
variable as supplied by the initarg \texttt{:dynamic-extent}.  If that
initarg was not supplied, this method returns \texttt{nil}.

\subsubsection{Special variable information}

\Defclass {special-variable-info}

This class represents information about special variables.   An
instance of this class is returned by a call to \texttt{variable-info}
when it turns out that the symbol passed as an argument refers to a
special variable.


\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the special variable.  This initarg
must be supplied. 

\Definitarg {:type}

This initarg is used to supply the \emph{type} of the special
variable.  The type can be any type specifier and it may contain
user-defined types.  If this initarg is omitted, it defaults to
\texttt{t}. 

\Definitarg {:ignore}

This initarg is used to supply \emph{ignore} information about the
special variable.  The value of this initarg can be either
\texttt{ignore} (i.e., the symbol with that name in the
\texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the variable is declared
\texttt{ignore}, \texttt{ignorable} (i.e., the symbol with that name
in the \texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the variable is
declared \texttt{ignorable}, or \texttt{nil} meaning that no ignore or
ignorable declaration for this variable is in scope.  If this initarg
is not supplied, it defaults to \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt special-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{special-variable-info}, this
method returns the name of the special variable as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {type} {(info {\tt special-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{special-variable-info}, this
method returns the \emph{type} of the variable as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:type}.  If that initarg was not supplied, this method
returns \texttt{t}.

\Defmethod {ignore} {(info {\tt special-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{special-variable-info}, this
method returns the \emph{ignore} information of the special variable as
supplied by the initarg \texttt{:ignore}.  If that initarg was not
supplied, this method returns \texttt{nil}.

\subsubsection{Constant variable information}

\Defclass {constant-variable-info}

This class represents information about constant variables.   An
instance of this class is returned by a call to \texttt{variable-info}
when it turns out that the symbol passed as an argument refers to a
constant variable.

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the constant variable.  This initarg
must be supplied. 

\Definitarg {:value}

This initarg supplies the value of the constant variable.  This
initarg must be supplied.

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt constant-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{constant-variable-info}, this
method returns the name of the constant variable as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {value} {(info {\tt constant-variable-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{constant-variable-info}, this
method returns the value of the constant variable as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:value}.

\subsubsection{Symbol macro information}

\Defclass {symbol-macro-info}

This class represents information about symbol macros.  An
instance of this class is returned by a call to \texttt{variable-info}
when it turns out that the symbol passed as an argument refers to a
symbol macro.

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the symbol macro.  This initarg must
be supplied.

\Definitarg {:expansion}

This initarg supplies the expansion of the symbol macro.  This initarg
must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:type}

This initarg is used to supply the \emph{type} of the symbol macro.
The type can be any type specifier and it may contain user-defined
types.  If this initarg is omitted, it defaults to \texttt{t}.

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt symbol-macro-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{symbol-macro-info}, this method
returns the name of the symbol macro as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {expansion} {(info {\tt symbol-macro-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{symbol-macro-info}, this method
returns the expansion of the symbol macro as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:expansion}.

\Defmethod {type} {(info {\tt symbol-macro-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{symbol-macro-info}, this method
returns the \emph{type} of the symbol macro as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:type}.  If that initarg was not supplied, this method returns
\texttt{t}.

\subsection{Function information}

\Defgeneric {function-info} {environment function-name}

This function is called by the compiler whenever a symbol in a
\emph{function} position is to be compiled or whenever a function name
is found in a context where it is known to refer to a function.  It
returns an instance of one of the classes described below.

\Defcondition {no-function-info}

This condition is signaled by \sysname{} when a client-supplied method
on the generic function \texttt{function-info} returns \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod {name} {(condition {\tt no-function-info})}

This method returns the name of the function for which no info was
available. 

\subsubsection{Local function information}

\Defclass {local-function-info}

This class represents information about local functions introduced by
\texttt{flet} or \texttt{labels}.  An instance of this class is
returned by a call to \texttt{function-info} when it turns out that
the function name passed as an argument refers to a local function. 

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the local function.  This initarg
must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:identity}

This initarg is used to supply some kind of implementation-defined 
\emph{identity}.  The implementation can supply any object as the
identity, because it is not interpreted by the compiler.  However, the
\emph{same} identity must be supplied each time for a particular
local function.  This initarg must be supplied. 

\Definitarg {:type}

This initarg is used to supply the \emph{type} of the local function.
The type can be any function type specifier and it may contain
user-defined types.  If this initarg is omitted, it defaults to
\texttt{t}.

\Definitarg {:inline}

This initarg is used to supply \emph{inline} information about the
local function.  The value of this initarg can be either
\texttt{inline} (i.e., the symbol with that name in the
\texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the function is declared
\texttt{inline}, \texttt{notinline} (i.e., the symbol with that name
in the \texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the function is
declared \texttt{notinline}, or \texttt{nil} meaning that no inline
declaration for this function is in scope.  If this initarg is not
supplied, it defaults to \texttt{nil}.

\Definitarg {:ignore}

This initarg is used to supply \emph{ignore} information about the
local function.  The value of this initarg can be either
\texttt{ignore} (i.e., the symbol with that name in the
\texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the function is declared
\texttt{ignore}, \texttt{ignorable} (i.e., the symbol with that name
in the \texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the function is
declared \texttt{ignorable}, or \texttt{nil} meaning that no ignore or
ignorable declaration for this function is in scope.  If this initarg
is not supplied, it defaults to \texttt{nil}.

\Definitarg {:dynamic-extent}

This initarg is used to supply \emph{dynamic extent} information about
the local function.  The value of this initarg can be either
\texttt{t}, meaning that the function has been declared
\texttt{dynamic-extent}, or \texttt{nil}, meaning that the function
has not been declared \texttt{dynamic-extent}.  The default value when
this initarg is not supplied is \texttt{nil}. 

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt local-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{local-function-info}, this
method returns the name of the local function as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {identity} {(info {\tt local-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{local-function-info}, this
method returns the identity of the local function as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:identity}.

\Defmethod {type} {(info {\tt local-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{local-function-info}, this
method returns the \emph{type} of the local function as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:type}.  If that initarg was not supplied, this method
returns \texttt{t}.

\Defmethod {inline} {(info {\tt local-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{local-function-info}, this
method returns the \emph{inline} information of the local function as
supplied by the initarg \texttt{:inline}.  If that initarg was not
supplied, this method returns \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod {ignore} {(info {\tt local-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{local-function-info}, this
method returns the \emph{ignore} information of the local function as
supplied by the initarg \texttt{:ignore}.  If that initarg was not
supplied, this method returns \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod {dynamic-extent} {(info {\tt local-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{local-function-info}, this
method returns the \emph{dynamic extent} information of the local
function as supplied by the initarg \texttt{:dynamic-extent}.  If that
initarg was not supplied, this method returns \texttt{nil}.

\subsubsection{Global function information}

\Defclass {global-function-info}

This class represents information about global functions.  An instance
of this class is returned by a call to \texttt{function-info} when it
turns out that the function name passed as an argument refers to a
global function.

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the global function.  This initarg
must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:type}

This initarg is used to supply the \emph{type} of the global function.
The type can be any function type specifier and it may contain
user-defined types.  If this initarg is omitted, it defaults to
\texttt{t}.

\Definitarg {:inline}

This initarg is used to supply \emph{inline} information about the
global function.  The value of this initarg can be either
\texttt{inline} (i.e., the symbol with that name in the
\texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the function is declared
\texttt{inline}, \texttt{notinline} (i.e., the symbol with that name
in the \texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the function is
declared \texttt{notinline}, or \texttt{nil} meaning that no inline
declaration for this function is in scope.  If this initarg is not
supplied, it defaults to \texttt{nil}.

\Definitarg {:ignore}

This initarg is used to supply \emph{ignore} information about the
global function.  The value of this initarg can be either
\texttt{ignore} (i.e., the symbol with that name in the
\texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the function is declared
\texttt{ignore}, \texttt{ignorable} (i.e., the symbol with that name
in the \texttt{common-lisp} package) meaning that the function is
declared \texttt{ignorable}, or \texttt{nil} meaning that no ignore or
ignorable declaration for this function is in scope.  If this initarg
is not supplied, it defaults to \texttt{nil}.

\Definitarg {:compiler-macro}

This initarg is used to supply a \emph{compiler macro function} when
a compiler macro is associated with the global function.  If this
initarg is not given, it defaults to \texttt{nil}, meaning that no
compiler macro is associated with this function. 

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt global-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{global-function-info}, this
method returns the name of the global function as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {type} {(info {\tt global-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{global-function-info}, this
method returns the \emph{type} of the global function as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:type}.  If that initarg was not supplied, this method
returns \texttt{t}.

\Defmethod {inline} {(info {\tt global-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{global-function-info}, this
method returns the \emph{inline} information of the global function as
supplied by the initarg \texttt{:inline}.  If that initarg was not
supplied, this method returns \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod {ignore} {(info {\tt global-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{global-function-info}, this
method returns the \emph{ignore} information of the global function as
supplied by the initarg \texttt{:ignore}.  If that initarg was not
supplied, this method returns \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod compiler-macro {(info {\tt global-function-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{global-function-info}, this
method returns the \emph{compiler macro function} information
associated with the global function, as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:compiler-macro}.  If that initarg was not supplied, this
method returns \texttt{nil}.

\subsubsection{Local macro information}

\Defclass {local-macro-info}

This class represents information about local macros introduced by
\texttt{macrolet}.  An instance of this class is returned by a call to
\texttt{function-info} when it turns out that the function name passed
as an argument refers to a local macro.

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the local macro.  This initarg
must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:expander}

This initarg is used to supply the macro function used to expand macro
forms that use this macro.  This initarg must be supplied. 

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt local-macro-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{local-macro-info}, this
method returns the name of the local macro as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {expander} {(info {\tt local-macro-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{local-macro-info}, this
method returns the expander of the local macro as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:expander}.

\subsubsection{Global macro information}

\Defclass {global-macro-info}

This class represents information about global macros introduced by
\texttt{macrolet}.  An instance of this class is returned by a call to
\texttt{function-info} when it turns out that the function name passed
as an argument refers to a global macro.

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the global macro.  This initarg
must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:expander}

This initarg is used to supply the macro function used to expand macro
forms that use this macro.  This initarg must be supplied. 

\Definitarg {:compiler-macro}

This initarg is used to supply a \emph{compiler macro function} when
a compiler macro is associated with the global macro.  If this
initarg is not given, it defaults to \texttt{nil}, meaning that no
compiler macro is associated with this macro. 

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt global-macro-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{global-macro-info}, this
method returns the name of the global macro as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {expander} {(info {\tt global-macro-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{global-macro-info}, this
method returns the expander of the global macro as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:expander}.

\Defmethod compiler-macro {(info {\tt global-macro-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{global-macro-info}, this
method returns the \emph{compiler macro function} information
associated with the global macro, as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:compiler-macro}.  If that initarg was not supplied, this
method returns \texttt{nil}.

\subsubsection{Special operator information}

\Defclass {special-operator-info}

This class represents information about special operators.  An
instance of this class is returned by a call to \texttt{function-info}
when it turns out that the function name passed as an argument refers
to a specialoperator.

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the special operator.  This initarg
must be supplied.

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt special-operator-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{special-operator-info}, this
method returns the name of the special operator as supplied by the
initarg \texttt{:name}.

\subsection{Block information}

\Defgeneric {block-info} {environment symbol}

\Defcondition {no-block-info}

This condition is signaled by \sysname{} when a client-supplied method
on the generic function \texttt{block-info} returns \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod {name} {(condition {\tt no-block-info})}

This method returns the name of the block for which no info was
available. 

\Defclass {block-info}

This class represents information about blocks introduced by
\texttt{block}.  An instance of this class is returned by a call to
\texttt{block-info} when the symbol passed as an argument refers to a
block.

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the block.  This initarg must be
supplied.

\Definitarg {:identity}

This initarg is used to supply some kind of implementation-defined 
\emph{identity}.  The implementation can supply any object as the
identity, because it is not interpreted by the compiler.  However, the
\emph{same} identity must be supplied each time for a particular
block.  This initarg must be supplied. 

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt block-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{block-info}, this method
returns the name of the block as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {identity} {(info {\tt block-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{block-info}, this method
returns the identity of the block as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:identity}.

\subsection{Tag information}

\Defgeneric {tag-info} {environment tag}

\Defcondition {no-tag-info}

This condition is signaled by \sysname{} when a client-supplied method
on the generic function \texttt{tag-info} returns \texttt{nil}.

\Defmethod {name} {(condition {\tt no-tag-info})}

This method returns the name of the tag for which no info was
available. 

\Defclass {tag-info}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg supplies the name of the tag.  This initarg must be
supplied.

\Definitarg {:identity}

This initarg is used to supply some kind of implementation-defined 
\emph{identity}.  The implementation can supply any object as the
identity, because it is not interpreted by the compiler.  However, the
\emph{same} identity must be supplied each time for a particular
tag.  This initarg must be supplied. 

\Defmethod {name} {(info {\tt tag-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{tag-info}, this method
returns the name of the block as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {identity} {(info {\tt tag-info})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{tag-info}, this method
returns the identity of the tag as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:identity}.

\subsection{Optimization information}

\Defgeneric {optimize-info} {environment}

Client-supplied methods on this function must always return a valid
instance of the class \texttt{optimize-info}.  For qualities that have
no explicit entries in the environment, the default values should be
supplied. 

\Defclass {optimize-info}

\Definitarg {:speed}

This initarg supplies a value for the \emph{speed} quality.  The
argument must be an integer between $0$ and $3$ inclusive.  If this
initarg is omitted, the value defaults to $3$.

\Definitarg {:compilation-speed}

This initarg supplies a value for the \emph{compilation-speed}
quality.  The argument must be an integer between $0$ and $3$
inclusive.  If this initarg is omitted, the value defaults to $3$.

\Definitarg {:safety}

This initarg supplies a value for the \emph{safety} quality.  The
argument must be an integer between $0$ and $3$ inclusive.  If this
initarg is omitted, the value defaults to $3$.

\Definitarg {:debug}

This initarg supplies a value for the \emph{debug} quality.  The
argument must be an integer between $0$ and $3$ inclusive.  If this
initarg is omitted, the value defaults to $3$.

\Definitarg {:space}

This initarg supplies a value for the \emph{space} quality.  The
argument must be an integer between $0$ and $3$ inclusive.  If this
initarg is omitted, the value defaults to $3$.

\Defmethod {speed} {(info {\tt optimize-info})}

This method returns the value of the \emph{speed} quality as supplied
by the initarg \texttt{:speed}.  If that initarg was not supplied the
value $3$ is returned. 

\Defmethod {compilation-speed} {(info {\tt optimize-info})}

This method returns the value of the \emph{compilation-speed} quality
as supplied by the initarg \texttt{:compilation-speed}.  If that
initarg was not supplied the value $3$ is returned.

\Defmethod {safety} {(info {\tt optimize-info})}

This method returns the value of the \emph{safety} quality as supplied
by the initarg \texttt{:safety}.  If that initarg was not supplied the
value $3$ is returned. 

\Defmethod {debug} {(info {\tt optimize-info})}

This method returns the value of the \emph{debug} quality as supplied
by the initarg \texttt{:debug}.  If that initarg was not supplied the
value $3$ is returned. 

\Defmethod {space} {(info {\tt optimize-info})}

This method returns the value of the \emph{space} quality as supplied
by the initarg \texttt{:space}.  If that initarg was not supplied the
value $3$ is returned. 

\subsection{Type information}

\Defgeneric {type-expand} {environment type}

This generic function is called with some arbitrary type specifier,
and the return value is an equivalent type specifier that does not
contain any user-defined types introduced by \texttt{deftype}. 

\section{Augmenting the environment}
\label{sec-environment-augmenting}

\subsection{Adding lexical variables}

\Defgeneric {add-lexical-variable} {environment symbol}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add
\textit{symbol} as the name of a lexical variable to
\textit{environment}.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\subsection{Adding special variables}

\Defgeneric {add-special-variable} {environment symbol}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add
\textit{symbol} as the name of a special variable to
\textit{environment}.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\subsection{Adding local symbol macros}

\Defgeneric {add-local-symbol-macro} {environment symbol expansion}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add a
local symbol macro to \textit{environment}.  The parameter
\textit{symbol} is the name of the macro and the parameter
\textit{expansion} is the expansion to be associated with the name.
The function returns a new environment augmented with the new
information.  The original environment is not affected.

\subsection{Adding local functions}

\Defgeneric {add-local-function} {environment function-name}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add
\textit{function-name} as the name of a local function to
\textit{environment}.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\subsection{Adding local macros}

\Defgeneric {add-local-macro} {environment symbol expander}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add a
local macro to \textit{environment}.  The parameter \textit{symbol} is
the name of the macro and the parameter \textit{expander} is a
\emph{macro function} to be associated with the name.  The function
returns a new environment augmented with the new information.  The
original environment is not affected.

\subsection{Adding blocks}

\Defgeneric {add-block} {environment symbol}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add
\textit{symbol} as the name of a block to \textit{environment}.  The
function returns a new environment augmented with the new information.
The original environment is not affected.

\subsection{Adding tags}

\Defgeneric {add-tag} {environment tag}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add
\textit{tag} as the name of a tag to \textit{environment}.  The tag is
either a symbol or an integer.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\subsection{Adding type information}

\Defgeneric {add-variable-type} {environment symbol type}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add type
information about a variable.  The compiler has already verified that
there is a lexical variable, a special variable, or a symbol macro
named \textit{symbol} in scope in \textit{environment}.  The function
returns a new environment augmented with the new information.  The
original environment is not affected.

\Defgeneric {add-function-type} {environment function-name type}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add type
information about a function.  The compiler has already verified that
there is a function named \textit{function-name} in scope in
\textit{environment}.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\subsection{Adding ignore information}

\Defgeneric {add-variable-ignore} {environment symbol ignore}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add ignore
information about a variable.  The compiler has already verified that
there is a lexical variable or a special variable named
\textit{symbol} in scope in \textit{environment}.  The value of the
\textit{ignore} parameter is either the symbol \texttt{ignore} or the
symbol \texttt{ignorable}.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\Defgeneric {add-function-ignore} {environment function-name ignore}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add ignore
information about a function.  The compiler has already verified that
there is a local function or a global function named
\textit{function-name} in scope in \textit{environment}.  The value of
the \textit{ignore} parameter is either the symbol \texttt{ignore} or
the symbol \texttt{ignorable}.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\subsection{Adding dynamic-extent information}

\Defgeneric {add-variable-dynamic-extent} {environment symbol}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add
dynamic-extent information about a variable.  The compiler has already
verified that there is a lexical variable named \textit{symbol} in
scope in \textit{environment}.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\Defgeneric {add-function-dynamic-extent} {environment function-name}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add
dynamic-extent information about a function.  The compiler has already
verified that there is a local function named \textit{function-name} in
scope in \textit{environment}.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\subsection{Adding optimize information}

\Defgeneric {add-optimize} {environment quality value}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add
optimize information to the environment.  The value of the
\textit{quality} parameter is one of the symbols \texttt{speed},
\texttt{compilation-speed}, \texttt{debug}, \texttt{safety}, and
\texttt{space}.  The value of the \textit{value} parameter is an
integer between $0$ and $3$ inclusive.  The function returns a new
environment augmented with the new information.  The original
environment is not affected.

\subsection{Adding inline information}

\Defgeneric {add-inline} {environment function-name inline}

This generic function is called by the compiler in order to add inline
information about a function.  The compiler has already verified that
there is a local function or a global function named
\textit{function-name} in scope in \textit{environment}.  The value of
the \textit{inline} parameter is either the symbol \texttt{inline} or
the symbol \texttt{notinline}.  The function returns a new environment
augmented with the new information.  The original environment is not
affected.

\section{Compile-time evaluation}
\label{sec-environment-compile-time-evaluation}

\Defgeneric {eval} {environment form}

This function is called by the compiler in order to evaluate forms in
\textit{environment}.  It is called as a result of top-level forms
being wrapped in \texttt{eval-when :compile-toplevel}. 

\section{Default augmentation classes}

\Defclass {entry}

This class is the base class of all entries in this section.

\subsection {Lexical variable}

\Defclass {lexical-variable}

This class represents a lexical variable.  It is a subclass of the
class \texttt{entry}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the lexical variable.  The
value must be a symbol.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt lexical-variable})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{lexical-variable}, this method
returns the name of the lexical variable as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:name}.

\subsection {Special variable}

\Defclass {special-variable}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the special variable.  The
value must be a symbol.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:global-p}

This initarg indicates whether the special variable is globally
proclaimed as special.  If omitted, the default value is
\texttt{nil}. 

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt special-variable})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{special-variable}, this method
returns the name of the special variable as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {global-p} {(entry {\tt special-variable})}

\subsection {Symbol macro}

\Defclass {symbol-macro}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the symbol macro.  The
value must be a symbol.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:expansion}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt symbol-macro})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{symbol-macro}, this method
returns the name of the symbol macro as supplied by the initarg
\texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {expansion} {(entry {\tt symbol-macro})}

\subsection {Function}

\Defclass {function}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the function.  The value
must be a function name.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:identity}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt function})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{function}, this method returns
the name of the function as supplied by the initarg \texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {identity} {(entry {\tt function})}

\subsection {Macro}

\Defclass {macro}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the macro.  The
value must be a symbol.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:expander}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt macro})}

Given an instance of the class \texttt{macro}, this method returns
the name of the macro as supplied by the initarg \texttt{:name}.

\Defmethod {expander} {(entry {\tt macro})}

\subsection {Block}

\Defclass {block}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the block.  The
value must be a symbol.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:identity}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt block})}

\Defmethod {identity} {(entry {\tt block})}

\subsection {Tag}

\Defclass {tag}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the tag.  The value must
be a go tag, i.e. a symbol or an integer.  This initarg must be
supplied.

\Definitarg {:identity}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt tag})}

\Defmethod {identity} {(entry {\tt tag})}

\subsection {Variable type}

\Defclass {variable-type}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the variable.  The value
must be a symbol.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:type}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt variable-type})}

\Defmethod {type} {(entry {\tt variable-type})}

\subsection {Function type}

\Defclass {function-type}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the function.  The
value must be a function name.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:type}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt function-type})}

\Defmethod {type} {(entry {\tt function-type})}

\subsection {Variable ignore}

\Defclass {variable-ignore}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the variable.  The value
must be a symbol.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:ignore}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt variable-ignore})}

\Defmethod {ignore} {(entry {\tt variable-ignore})}

\subsection {Function ignore}

\Defclass {function-ignore}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the function.  The
value must be a function name.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:ignore}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt function-ignore})}

\Defmethod {ignore} {(entry {\tt function-ignore})}

\subsection {Variable dynamic extent}

\Defclass {variable-dynamic-extent}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the lexical variable.  The
value must be a symbol.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt variable-dynamic-extent})}

\subsection {Function dynamic-extent}

\Defclass {function-dynamic-extent}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the function.  The
value must be a function name.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt function-dynamic-extent})}

\subsection {Inline}

\Defclass {inline}

\Definitarg {:name}

This initarg is used to specify the name of the function.  The
value must be a function name.  This initarg must be supplied.

\Definitarg {:inline}

\Defmethod {name} {(entry {\tt inline})}

\Defmethod {inline} {(entry {\tt inline})}

\subsection {Optimize}

\Defclass {optimize}

\Definitarg {:quality}

\Definitarg {:value}

\Defmethod {quality} {(entry {\tt optimize})}

\Defmethod {value} {(entry {\tt optimize})}

%%  LocalWords:  startup expanders expander subclasses
